

Operating System Structures 
Operating System (OS) structure refers to the way an operating system is designed and organized to 
manage  hardware  and  software  resources,  provide  services  to  users  and  applications,  and  ensure 
efficient  and  secure  operation  of  a  computer system. There are several different approaches to 
operating system structure, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. 
Different types of structures implementing Operating Systems as mentioned below. 
1. Simple Structure 
2. Layered Structure 
3. Micro Kernel Structure 
4. Modular Structure 
5. Hybrid Structure 
 
Simple Structure 
It is the simplest Operating System Structure and is not well defined. It can only be used for small and 
limited systems. In this structure, the interfaces and levels of functionality are well separated,hence 
programs can access I/O routines which can cause unauthorized access to I/O routines. 
This structure is implemented in MS-DOS operating system.The MS-DOS operating System is made up 
of various layers, each with its own set of functions. 
 
 
Advantages of Simple Structure 
 It is easy to develop because of the limited number of interfaces and layers. 
 Offers good performance due to lesser layers between hardware and applications. 

 Minimal overhead, suitable for resource-constrained environments. 
Disadvantages of Simple Structure 
 If one user program fails, the entire operating system crashes. 
 Limited functionality. 
 Abstraction or data hiding is not present as layers are connected and communicate with each 
other. 
 Layers  can  access  the  processes  going  in  the Operating  System,  which  can  lead  to  data 
modification and can cause Operating System to crash. 
 
Layered Structure 
In this type of structure, OS is divided into layers or levels. The hardware is on the bottom layer (layer 
0), while the user interface is on the top layer (layer N). These layers are arranged in a hierarchical 
way in which the top-level layers use the functionalities of their lower-level levels. Example:Linux 
The following are some of the key characteristics of a layered operating system structure: 
 Each  layer  is  responsible  for  a  specific  set  of  tasks.  This  makes  it  easier  to  understand, 
develop, and maintain the operating system. 
 Layers  are  typically  arranged  in  a  hierarchy.  This  means  that  each  layer  can  only  use  the 
services provided by the layers below it. 
 Layers  are  independent  of  each  other.  This  means  that  a  change  to  one  layer  should  not 
affect the other layers. 
Below is the Image illustrating the Layered structure in OS: 
 

Advantages of Layered Structure 
 A layered structure  is highly modular, meaning that each layer is responsible  for a specific 
set of tasks. This makes it easier to understand, develop, and maintain the operating system. 
 Each layer has its functionalities, so work tasks are isolated, and abstraction is present up to 
some level. 
 Debugging is easier as lower layers are debugged, and then upper layers are checked. 
Disadvantages of Layered Structure 
 In Layered Structure, layering causes degradation in performance. 
 It takes careful planning to construct the layers since higher layers only utilize the functions 
of lower layers. 
 There  can  be  some  performance  overhead  associated  with  the  communication  between 
layers. This is because each layer must pass data to the layer above it. 
 
Micro-Kernel structure 
Kernel is the core part of an operating system that manages system resources. It also acts as a bridge 
between the application and hardware of the computer. It is one of the first programs loaded on 
start-up (after the Bootloader).  
 
A microkernel  is a type of  operating system kernel that is  designed to  provide only the most  basic 
services  required  for  an  operating  system  to  function,  such  as  memory  management  and  process 
scheduling.  Other  services,  such  as  device  drivers  and  file  systems,  are  implemented  as  user-level 
processes that communicate with the microkernel via message passing. Ex:Mac OS 

 
Advantages of Micro-kernel structure: 
 It allows the operating system to be portable between platforms. 
 Enhanced system stability and security. 
 As each Micro-Kernel is isolated, it is safe and trustworthy. 
 Because Micro-Kernels are smaller, they can be successfully tested. 
 If any component or Micro-Kernel fails, the remaining operating System is 
unaffected and continues to function normally. 
Disadvantages of Micro-kernel structure: 
 Increased inter-module communication reduces system performance. 
 System is complex to be constructed. 
 Complexity in managing user-space components. 
 
Modular Structure 
In a modular operating system structure, the operating system is divided into a set of independent 
modules.  Each  module  is  responsible  for  a  specific  task,  such  as  memory  management,  process 
scheduling,    or    device    drivers.    Modules    can    be    loaded    and    unloaded dynamically,    as 
needed.EX:Solaris 

 
Advantages of Modular Structure 
 A modular structure is highly modular, meaning that each module is independent of the 
others. This makes it easier to understand, develop, and maintain the operating system. 
 A modular structure is very flexible. New modules can be added easily, and existing 
modules can be modified or removed without affecting the rest of the operating system. 
Disadvantages of Modular Structure 
 There can be some performance overhead associated with the communication between 
modules. This is because modules must communicate with each other through well-
defined interfaces. 
 A modular structure can  be more complex than other types of  operating system 
structures. This is because the modules must be carefully designed to ensure that they 
interact correctly 
Hybrid Structure 
Hybrid Structure as the name suggests consists of a hybrid of all the Structure explained so far and 
hence  it  has  properties  of  all  of  those  architectures  which  makes  it  highly  useful  in  present-day 
operating systems. The hybrid-Structure consists of three layers. 
1) Hardware abstraction layer: It is the interface between the kernel and hardware and is present 
at the lowest level. 
2) Microkernel Layer: This  is the  old microkernel that we know and it consists of CPU scheduling, 
memory management, and inter-process communication. 

3)  Application  Layer: It  acts  as  an  interface  between  the user  and  the microkernel.  It  contains 
functionalities like a file server, error detection, I/O device management, etc. 
 Example: Microsoft  Windows NT  kernel implements  a  hybrid  architecture  of  the  operating 
system. 
 
Advantages: 
1. Since  it  is  a  hybrid  of  other structures it  allows  various structures to  provide  their 
services respectively. 
2. It is easy to manage because it uses a layered approach. 
3. The number of layers is relatively lesser. 
4. Security and protection are relatively improved. 
Disadvantage: 
1. It increases overall complexity of system by implementing both structure (monolithic and 
micro) and making the system difficult to understand. 
 