

A computer system is divided into two categories: Hardware and Software.  
Hardware refers to the physical and visible components of the system such as a monitor, CPU, 
keyboard and mouse.  
Software, on the other hand, refers to a set of instructions which enable the hardware to perform 
a specific set of tasks. 
 
 
 
Types of Computer Software 
 System Software 
 Application Software 
System Software: System Software is a component of Computer Software that directly operates 
with Computer Hardware which has the work to control the Computer’s Internal Functioning and 
also takes responsibility for controlling Hardware Devices such as Printers, Storage Devices, etc. 
Types of System Software include Operating systems, Language processors, and Device Drivers. 
Application Software: Application Software are the software that works the basic operations of 
the computer. It performs a specific task for users. Application Software basically includes Word 
Processors, Spreadsheets, etc. Types of Application software include General Purpose Software, 
Customized Software, etc. 
 
Definition: 
Operating System can be defined as a system software which acts as an interface between user and 
the hardware. It manages all other applications and programs in a computer, and it is loaded into 
the computer by a boot program. 

 
 
Operating System Objectives 
 To make the computer system convenient to use in an efficient manner. 
 To hide the details of the hardware resources from the users. 
 To provide users a convenient interface to use the computer system. 
 To act as an intermediary between the hardware and its users, making it easier for the 
users to access and use other resources. 
 To manage the resources of a computer system. 
 To  keep  track  of  who  is  using  which  resource,  granting  resource  requests,  and 
mediating conflicting requests from different programs and users. 
 To provide efficient and fair sharing of resources among users and programs. 
 
User View and System View 
The  operating  system  can  be  observed  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  user  or  the  system.  This  is 
known  as  the  user  view  and  the  system  view  respectively.  More  details  about  these  are  given  as 
follows −
 
User View: 

The user view depends on the system interface that is used by the users. The different types of 
user view experiences can be explained as follows − 
 If the user is using a personal computer, the operating system is largely designed to make 
the interaction easy. Some attention is also paid to the performance of the system, but there is no 
need for the operating  system  to  worry  about  resource  utilization.  This  is  because the personal 
computer uses all the resources available and there is no sharing. 
 If the user is using a system connected to a mainframe or a minicomputer, the operating 
system  is  largely  concerned  with  resource  utilization.  This  is  because  there  may  be  multiple 
terminals connected to the mainframe and the operating system makes sure that all the resources 
such as CPU,memory, I/O devices etc. are divided uniformly between them. 
 If  the user  is  sitting on a workstation connected to  other  workstations  through  networks, 
then the operating system needs to focus on both individual usage of resources and sharing though 
the network. This happens because the workstation exclusively uses its own resources but it also 
needs to share files etc. with other workstations across the network. 
 If the user is using a handheld computer such as a mobile, then the operating system handles 
the usability of the device including a few remote operations. The battery level of the device is also 
taken into account. 
 There are some devices that contain very less or no user view because there is no interaction 
with the users. Examples are embedded computers in home devices, automobiles etc. 
System View: 
From the System point of view the operating system is the program which is most intermediate 
with the hardware.  
 The system views the operating system as a resource allocator. There are many resources such 
as CPU time, memory space, file storage space, I/O devices etc. that are required by processes for 
execution.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  operating  system  to  allocate  these  resources  judiciously  to  the 
processes so that the computer system can run as smoothly as possible. 
 The operating system can also work as a control program. It manages all the processes and I/O 
devices so that the computer system works smoothly and there are no errors. It makes sure that 
the I/O devices work in a proper manner without creating problems. 