

DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 
UNIT IV – TOPIC 2 
Implementation of Atomicity and Durability 
 
 
Atomicity  and  durability  are ACID  properties that  ensure  the  reliability  and  consistency  of  transactions 
in DBMS  
Atomicity: 
It  is  one of  the  key  characteristics  of  transactions  in  database  management  systems  (DBMS),  which 
guarantees that every operation within a transaction is handled as a single, indivisible unit of work. 
Either  all  the  changes  made  by  a  transaction  are  committed  to  the  database  or  none  of  them  are 
committed. 
Durability: 
Durability,  guarantees that changes made by a transaction once it has been committed are permanently 
kept in the database and will not be lost even in the event of a system failure or crash. 
 
The  recovery-management  component  of  a  database  system  can  support  atomicity  and  durability  by  a 
variety of schemes. We first consider a simple, but extremely inefficient, scheme called the shadow copy 
scheme.  
In the shadow-copy scheme, a transaction that wants to update the database first creates a complete copy 
of  the  database.  All  updates  are  done  on  the  new  database  copy,  leaving  the  original  copy,  the  shadow 
copy,  untouched.  If  at  any  point  the  transaction  has  to  be  aborted,  the  system  merely  deletes  the  new 
copy. The old copy of the database has not been affected. 
 
This  scheme  is  based  on  making  copies  of  the  database,  called  shadow  copies,  assumes  that  only  one 
transaction  is  active  at  a  time.  The  scheme  also  assumes  that  the  database  is  simply  a  file  on  disk.  A 
pointer called db-pointer is maintained on disk; it points to the current copy of the database. 
If the transaction completes, it is committed as follows: 
First, the operating system is asked to make sure that all pages of the new copy of the database have been 
written out to disk. (Unix systems use the flush command for this purpose.) 
After the operating system has written all the pages to disk, the database system updates the pointer db-
pointer  to  point  to  the  new  copy  of  the  database;  the  new  copy  then  becomes  the  current  copy  of  the 
database. The old copy of the database is then deleted. 

The  transaction  is  said  to  have  been  committed  at  the  point  where  the  updated  db-pointer  is 
written to disk. 
  
We now consider how the technique handles transaction and system failures.  
Maintaining Automicity 
⮚ First, consider transaction failure. If the transaction fails at any time before db-pointer 
is updated, the old contents of the database are not affected.  
⮚ We can abort the transaction by just deleting the new copy of the database.  
⮚ Once the transaction has been committed, all the updates that it performed are in the 
database pointed to by db-pointer.  
⮚ Thus,  either  all  updates  of  the  transaction  are  reflected,  or  none  of  the  effects  are 
reflected, regardless of transaction failure. 
Maintaining Durability 
⮚ Suppose that the system fails at any time before the updated db-pointer is written to disk. 
Then,  when  the  system  restarts,  it  will  read  db- pointer  and  will  thus  see  the  original 
contents of the database, and none of the effects of the transaction will be visible on the 
database.  
⮚ Next, suppose that the system fails after db- pointer has been updated on disk. Before the 
pointer  is  updated,  all  updated  pages  of  the  new  copy  of  the  database  were  written  to 
disk.  
⮚ Again,  we  assume  that,  once a  file  is  written  to  disk,  its  contents  will  not  be  damaged 
even  if  there  is  a  system  failure.  Therefore,  when  the  system  restarts,  it  will  read  db-
pointer and will thus see the contents of the database after all the updates performed by 
the transaction. 
 